ISSN 1466-8858

Volume 5 Preprint 6

A Proposed Systematic Concept To Evaluate The Performance Of Cathodic Protection Of Buried Pipe Line In The Soil
Ashraf A. Ahmed , 4 Mamal el Suker str. , Garden City , Cairo , Egypt.
Abstract-Both corrosion process and cathodic protection process could be explained totally by an electric quantities. The proposed electric concept of corrosion process comes from the +ve charge available in the solution which by attachment to the atoms of the metal convert them into +ve ions. These +ve charge QP discharge to the remote earth through a stray capacitance between metal outer surface area (o.s.a) and earth. Consequently, a building up potential between pipe and earth takes place as Q = C x V. The soil around the pipe consist the dielectric material of the stray capacitor between cylindrical metal o.s.a and the co axial imaginary earthing cylinder. For coated pipe line, the cylindrical capacitor condition (pipe metal o.s.a + coating + soil layer + imaginary earth coaxial cylinder) is a reflection of the pipe condition either it is subjected to corrosion or it is cathodically protected. For any pipeline segment, the parameters around such segment which affect directly on the cathodic protection level could be compared with the insulation condition and the protection current IP obtained from the intelligent pig. Such parameters are combined in one factor called the soil factor Sf which equal to Sf =(1/K) pHH Log  where pH is the power of Hydrogen, H is the humidity,  is the soil resistivity at H= 10% and K is the dielectric constant of the compound dielectric around the cylindrical segment (coating + soil layer). For the worst case of coating deterioration, the dielectric constant will equal to the dielectric constant r of the soil at H= 10%.The status of cathodic protection level or the corrosion level could be obtained for any segment from the onion curves which correlate the soil factor Sf and the protection current IP at different half cell voltage Vh-c levels. I. INTRODUCTION The only way in which atoms of the metal may detach themselves from the surface and enter the solution is in the form of positively charged ions. These ions can not be formed unless there are +ve charges available in the solution which by attachment to the atoms of the metal convert them into ions . Wherever there is water ( polarization & electric dipole ), there are some hydrogen ions formed by its dissociation and these ions are always available to give their charges to the metal atoms. Regardless of the number of hydrogen ions present and regardless of the ability of the solution to keep supplying them as they are used up in the corrosion process, there will be no positive ions formed if an adequate supply of electrons (negative charges ) is maintained at the surface of the metal to combine with and thus neutralize all the positive charges that drift or attached that way on hydrogen ions . Then the cathodic protection is a process taking place at the boundary of the metal, where the maintain of a continuous negative charge prevents the formation of any metal ions. This continuous charge is maintained by connecting the structure to some source of energy which is capable of supplying direct current. The amount of current which must be supplied to maintain the continuous negative charge is determined by the rapidity with which the charge is used up in neutralizing hydrogen ions and in leaking uselessly away because of the lack of protection of isolation. The terminal through which current enters the electrolyte (soil) is the anode, and is usually subject to corrosion by the current; the terminal through which the current leaves the electrolyte is the cathode and is protected from corrosion by the current. Protection of a buried pipeline is accomplished by using a combination of coating and cathodic protection . Primary protection is achieved by using coatings to provide an insulating barrier between the pipeline and its corrosive environment. Cathodic protection is applied to a pipeline to provide corrosion protection at coating defects and therefore is considered to be a supplementary system while with a badly deteriorated coating, the cathodic protection is considered the primary corrosion protection system. Where cathodic protection is used as the primary corrosion protection system, as with badly deteriorated coating, problems with monitoring, adequate distribution of protection current and maintenance of the cathodic protection arise. Assuring pipeline Integrity is a complex procedure that begins during design and construction of the pipeline where the pipe materials, construction procedures, internal and external coatings, commissioning and testing establish the pipeline's integrity capabilities. Many systems are used in assuring the integrity of pipeline that include: * Surveillance * Excavations * Hydrostatic testing * Leak Detection surveys * Intelligent pigging *Close interval surveys

This is a preprint of a paper that has been submitted for publication in the Journal of Corrosion Science and Engineering. It will be reviewed and, subject to the reviewers' comments, be published online at http://www.umist.ac.uk/corrosion/jcse in due course. Until such time as it has been fully published it should not normally be referenced in published work. © UMIST 2004.

The major sources of pipe line incidents related to Natural Gas pipelines are: Source Chemical, Bacterial , Sour Gas General Corrosion Pitting Corrosion Stress corrosion Cracking Mechanical Damage Earth movement Construction Material Defect % of Incidents 4.0 9.0 13.5 1.5 44.0 8.0 7.5 12.5

Most of the above mentioned defects could be detected nowadays by using a number of pipeline inspection pigs that provide information about metal loss, dents, cracks and strains that assist in estimating current and future safe operating conditions, remaining life or the potential for life extension of the pipeline. A proposed new method in assuring pipeline integrity could be obtained if we can get the cathodic protection level along the buried pipeline length by deduce a relation ship between the current passed through the pipeline segment Ip, surrounding parameters which affect directly on corrosion process (a new parameter called the soil factor) and the cathodic protection level Vh-c. II. THE ELECTRIC THEORY OF CORROSION PROCESS The proposed electric theory of corrosion depending on the concept of the +ve charge QP created on the outer surface area of the buried pipe line due to the building up potential VP-PE between the pipe and the remote earth. The created charge QP is dissipated to the surrounding medium (corrosion process) through a stray capacitance CP-PE between the pipe and an imaginary coaxial cylindrical earth. The dielectric constant of the soil r2 act with the dielectric constant of the pipe coating material r1 as a coaxial cylindrical capacitor with compound dielectric. As r1 of the coating material is decreased, the total capacitor is decreased (two capacitors are in series) then charge Q = C x V is decreased i.e. corrosion process is decreased. If deterioration of coating material occurred, then r1 is increased i.e. total capacitance of the compound dielectric is increased i.e. corrosion process is increased as the created charge on metal outer surface area Q will be increased. Consider a cylinder pipeline segement, it's length = L mt burried barely in a soil have a dielectric constant = r and a soil resistivity =  . mt, the humidity of the soil is H % and the power of hydrogen = pH. Under the assumption that the pipeline segement does not subjected to any of an external effects as pipe crossing, road crossing, which cause a stray effect, a charge Q will be created on o.s.a and a building up VP-PE across a stray capacitance CP-PE takes place. The capacitor plates considered to be the cylindrical o.s.a of the pipeline segement with radius a = r1 as the first plate while the area of an imaginary co-axial cylinder with radius b = r2 is the second plate. The system is illustrated in Fig. 1

Fig. 1Bare pipe line segment with the imaginary coaxial remote earth

rges it's stored energy, a stray current IP-PE will flow to the earth. In other words, such system could be represented more clearly as shown in Fig. 2.

2

Fig. 2 Schematic diagram of bare pipe line segment with the surrounding medium parameters

III. MEASURING THE CURRENT IP THROUGH THE PIPE LINE SEGMENT This is a new idea of the voltage drop technique to measure the protection current IP passed through the buried pipeline. By considering a pipe line with total length L mt, if such length is divided into segments with length L mt./segment then : Total length = segment length x n L = n Lseg. Electrically, the pipe line could be considered as: total resistance=segment resistance × n as shown in fig. 3

Fig. 3 Electrical analogue of the total pipe line length

Now if the voltage drop between two points is measured then the protection current IP could be obtained by the equation :

I P = V Rseg.

(1)

i.e. an additional voltage drop canister could be added with the available intelligent pig to measure the protection current IP as shown in fig. 4 and by using GPS technology to determine the segment position .

Fig. 4 voltage drop canister pigged with the fluid through the pipe line

For an example, suppose the following: Pig run speed  = 1 mt. Recorded sample rate = 32 HZ Time = 1/f = 1/32 sec Segment length Lseg. =  × T = 3.125 cm Now, the measured protection current could be considered as a reflection of the cathodic protection level. Many questions arise : · · · · What is the relation between the protection current IP and the half cell voltage Vh.c for the pipe line segment. What is the affect of the surrounding medium on the protection current IP. What is the factor by which the cathodic level of the pipe line segment could be obtained. What is the proof of the Electric theory of corrosion. IV. THE DIELECTRIC CONSTANT r OF THE SOIL Almost from the start of the application of the electrolytic corrosion protection techniques, calculations have been required to quantify the amounts of current that are to be passed between the anodes and cathodes in the system. Not only are the magnitudes of the currents important but their distribution is a matter of considerable significance . Formula that were derived for the behaviour of capacitors, magnetic and electric fields, and for electric transmission lines were adapted to calculate the values of conductance and distribution of current from cathodic protection anodes. Calculations are only possible by these classical formula for simple geometries, and a typical situation is shown in Fig. 5 which shows a cylinderical electrode spaced from a large flate plate cathode.

sec.

3

Fig. 5 Stray capacitance of an anode w.r.t large flat plate

A formula that expresses the capacitance C in picofarads between the two surfaces is givin in equation (2) [10] :

  1 4.139  2h = log + log   c LK  r   
Where D,L,h are in cm, K is the dielectric constant r and D= 2r

L + 2 L + 2

L2 + r2 4 L2 + 4h 2 4

     

(2)

In a corrosion Process of the pipeline, the pipe line segment which is subjected to corrosion could be considered as an anode while the remote coaxial earthing cylinder is to be considered the large flat plate cathode. According to that assumption, which it will be verified it's correction later, then if a rectangular plate of iron spaced by h from a pipeline segment L with outer radius r and the space between them is filled with soil and by substituting in equation (2), the dielectric constant r could be obtained for many different soil resistivitys. Fig.6 Shows the trend line of the capacitance CP-PL and the factor pHH log  = Ks Sf ,where Ks is the dielectric constant of the soil and Sf is the soil factor .
3 2.5 2 1.5 1 0.5 0 -0.5 0

CP PL

nF

0.5

1 KsSf

1.5 ohm mt

2

2.5

3

Fig.6 The capacitance CP-PL and the factor pHH log  at H = 10%

V. CORROSION & THE BATTERY ACTION (SOURCE OF ENERGY) If the pipeline segment is short circuited with the rectangular plate through an ammeter connected in series, a circulating current IPdirected from pipe to the plate takes place. The current is directed from the lower surface area to the higher surface area i.e. the pipe act as an anode while the rectangular plate act as an cathode. The IP-PL is considered the maximum stray current from pipe to plate i.e. maximum corrosion. Fig. 7 Shows the system and the electrical analogue of such system while table 1 show the comparison between the battery cell and the corrosion cell . Battery Cell Anode Cathode Electrolyte Discharge Current Charge current Corrosion Cell L.S.A Lower surface area H.S.A Higher surface area r of soil + pH + H Stray Current Cathodic Protection charging current

PL

Table 1 The Comparison between the corrosion & battery cells

4

Fig. 7 Corrosion cell and the equivalent battery action

In practical case, any metal structure buried in the ground is considered the L.S.A i.e. as an anode w.r.t the huge ball of iron at the earth center which is considered the H.S.A i.e. the cathode. If the L.S.A is isolated from H.S.A through a proper insulation then the corrosion cell is not completed i.e. protection of metal structure from corrosion. In other words, the stray current (discharging) could be compensated by external source (charging)to avoid corrosion i.e. cathodic protection process. Fig.8 a, b shows the relationship between the building up voltage VP-PL between L.S.A & H.S.A (pipe and plate), the short circuit circulating current IP-PL w.r.t the factor pH H Log  (Ks Sf).
0.4 volt VP PL 0.3 0.2 0.1 0 0 0.5 1 Ks Sf 1.5 2 ohm mt 2.5 3

Fig.8 (a) The building up voltage VP-PL between L.S.A & H.S.A (pipe and plate) and the factor pHH Log  at H = 10%

3 IP PL m amp 2 1 0 -1 0 0.5 1 Ks Sf 1.5 ohm mt 2 2.5 3

Fig.8 (b) The short circuit circulating current IP-PL and the factor pHH Log  at H = 10%.

The volt ampere of the corrosion cell of pipe-plate at maximum stray current could be obtained i.e. Istray)max = I P-PL . Then the volt ampere of such cell is equal to VP-PL * IP-PL . Fig.9 shows the relationship between the power of such source and the factor pH H Log  at H = 10%.
0.5 0.4 m watt VI 0.3 0.2 0.1 0 -0.1 0 -0.2 0.5 1 Ks Sf 1.5 ohm mt 2 2.5 3

Fig.9 Power of the battery source and the factor pH H Log  at H = 10%

VI. ELECTRICAL ANALOGUE CIRCUIT OF THE CORROSION AND CATHODIC PROTECTION PROCESS In corrosion process , the metal pipe could be considered as a current source (stray current) to the surrounding medium (stray capacitor to the remote earth) i.e the electrical analogue circuit of the pipe line segment with the surrounding medium effect could be represented as a current source connected in series with the stray capacitance between metal o.s.a and the remote earth .Consequently , the corrosion process could be electrically simulated for both bare pipe and at bad condition of coating material as in fig.10

5

Fig. 10 Electrical analogue circuit of the corrosion process

Fig.11 The electrical analogue circuit of the cathodic protection process (a) by using well coating material (b)by using galvanic and impressed current system

In case of cathodic protection process if the protection current either it is greater than the stray current (net current will flow through the pipe) or less than the stray current (net current will flow through the stray capacitor to the remote earth) , the c.p level of the pipe line segment could be determined if the protection current before and after the pipe line segment is measured by using voltage drop canister pigged with an intelligent pig tool . For well coated pipe line segment , the electrical analogue circuit is as in fig.11a . Also , fig.11b shows the electric analogue circuit of the pipe line segment which is cathodically protected by galvanic system or impressed current system . VII. CLARIFICATION OF CORROSION PROCESS OF SOME APPLICATIONS BASED ON PROPOSED ELECTRIC THEORY OF CORROSION A. Effect of earthing network on C.P. level In a terminal contains a lattice of buried pipes and earthing network as shown in fig 12, a building up voltage between pipes and earth VP-PE takes place through the stray capacitance CP-PE between the pipe and earth. It means that corrosion takes place at points have stray capacitance with earth in case of insulation deterioration of the buried pipe.

Fig. 12 Stray capacitance between pipe line and earthing network

B. Effect of pipe crossing and /or parallel pipes on C.P. Level: The same idea as mentioned before, a stray capacitance between the two pipes CP-P either at exposing surface area at crossing point or along the two parallel pipes exposing spacing area as shown in Fig. 13

6

Fig. 13 Stray capacitance and building up potential between crossed pipes and parallel pipes

Each pipe has it's own cathodic protection level and/or L.S.A & H.S.A concept (Battery action). If there is a difference in potential i.e. VP-P exist, one plate act as +ve plate with respect to the other plate i.e. charge transfer from pipe to pipe through the stray capacitance between them. In other words , one of the pipe will be cathodically protected (- ve side of CP-P) while the other one will be subjected to corrosion (+ ve side of CP-P). In this case it is too difficult to solve such problem of corrosion especially for long parallel pipes until the technology of intelligent pig appears which detect the insulation deterioration along the route of the pipeline. Such technology till the moment doesn't prospect either the start of corrosion phenomena or c.p level along the total pipeline segments . This means that if it is able to measure the protection current Ip passed through the pipeline segments, it could prospect the case of each segment, either it is cathodically protected or it is subjected to corrosion. VIII. DEDUCTION OF THE SOIL FACTOR Sf, PARAMETER A. Effect of soil permitivity: Consider a pipeline segment Fig.14 coated with an insulation with dielectric constant r1 and the pipe is buried in soil. As mentioned before , a layer of the soil arounad the pipe create a stray capacitance CP-PE between the pipe wall and the earth. The dielectric constant of CP-PE capacitor is equal to r2. The pipeline segment in this case, could be considered as cylindrical capacitor with compound dielectric.

Fig. 14 Cylindrical capacitor of the pipe line segment and the compound dielectric of coating material and soil layer

Let : r1 = outer radius of the pipeline segment r2 = outer radius of the pipeline segment with coating r1 r3 = outer radius of the coaxial earthing cylinder , layer r2 obviously, there are two capacitors joined in series, the total capacitance of the pipe line segment is:CC Ctot. = 1 2 C1 + C 2 i.e. the total capacitance decreased. In other words the coated pipeline segment is isolated from the H.S.A (Battery action theory) i.e. Battery action is decreasing as Ctot. is decreasing by decreasing of r1 value.The ideal case of preventing corrosion at Ctot. ~ zero i.e. Battery cell is dead and equal to zero volt. The above mentioned clarification is simply considered the electric point of view of corrosion preventing by using coating method.

7

At points where deterioration of insulation occurred, the total capacitance increased i.e battery action is increased. In other words, Battery action is increasing as Ctot is increasing by increasing of r1 value. The worst case of corrosion at Ctot = CP-PE (Stray capacitance from pipe to earth through r2). We consider the studding of the worst case of corrosion at Ctot = CP-PE i.e. buried bare pipe line segment case (deterioration of the coating insulation) .Now, we can state that , cathodic protection level is increased by the decreasing of the capacitance of the cylindrical capacitor (compound dielectric "coating + soil") i.e Corrosion  Ctot i.e. Cathodic protection  1/  B. Effect Of The Coating Material r1: Now, for capacitors joined in series, charge is the same . Q = C1V1 = C2V2 (3)

Hence, the voltage gradient is given by the equation :
g max .1  r 2 . r2 = (4) g max .2  r1 . r1 i.e. voltage gradient is inversely proportional to the permitivity and the inner radius of the insulating material. gmax.2 is the voltage gradient of the soil layer around the pipe . The ideal case of preventing corrosion is when gmax2 = min.. i.e. r1 = 1 i.e the coating material is air which is not practical .

C. Effect of soil resistivity: At the same humidity (H) and the same power of hydrogen (pH) it is found that. Cathodic protection  log  D. Effect Of pHH Factor: It is obviously clear that , increasing of Humidity H is associated by the decreasing of the power of hydrogen pH. That means that the presence of H+ due to humidity trend the pH factor of the soil to the acidity region i.e. the soil in such case becomes more corrosive medium. Corrosion  pHH E. The Soil Factor Sf: It is now clear that the soil medium parameters affect directly on the cathodic protection level C.P. and the following combination of parameters (1/Ks)pHH Log  is equal to the soil factor Sf (at room temperature) : Sf = (1/Ks) pHH Log  Where: Ks = Dielectric constant of the soil at H = 10% (worst case at r1= r2 = r of the soil) pH = power of Hydrogen of the soil H = Humidity of the soil %  = Soil resistivity in . mt. at H= 10% The importance of the soil factor is that it is combining all parameters which can affect directly on the cathodic protection level or in corrosion process. Such factors which can be obtained by a direct measurement. This means that if it is possible to study the relation ship between Sf factor and the VP-PE, IP, CP-PE, Vh-c, then the status of cathodic protection level of any segment buried in the ground could be obtained. IX. THE SOIL FACTOR CHARACTERISTICS A. The soil factor and the stray capacitance : The stray capacitance CP-PE is affected by the change of the soil factor Sf i.e corrosion process is changed as CP-PE is changed or in other words corrosion is changed by the change of the soil factor Sf. The CP-PE value could be obtained in terms of soil factor Sf almost through a third order algebraic equation. The boxes of the same soil resistivity and at the same value of the soil factor Sf, it is found that the CP-PE value is not constant. That's because of the change of the power of hydrogen pH is associated by the change of the dielectric constant r of the soil around the bare pipe. In other words, as the pH value is decreased i-e H+ layer around the pipe is increased, the corrosion is increased. From Electric point of view, as pH is decreased (H+ ) the stray capacitance CP-PE is also increased i-e. corrosion process is increased. A sample is shown in fig. 15. (5)

8

35 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 -5 0

CP PE

nF

0.02

Sf

0.04 ohm.mt.

0.06

0.08

Fig. 15 CP-PE and Sf characteristic for boxes 1,2,3

B. The Soil Factor Sf And Pipe To Earth Potential VP-PE to keep Vh.c = -0.85 v : The building up voltage between pipe to earth VP-PE to keep Vh.c = -0.85 v could be represented in terms of the soil factor Sf. The (Sf `VP-PE) curves could be matched with a trend line which is mostly represented by a 3rd order algebraic equation. It is also clear that VP+ PE is increased negatively to keep the C.P level at Vh.c = -0.85 v by the decrease of pH factor (H ). A sample is shown is fig. 16, i.e. C.P.  VP-PE
0 -0.5
volt

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1

-1 -1.5 -2 -2.5 Sf ohm.mt.
Fig. 16 VP-PE and Sf characteristic for boxes 28,29,30

C. The Soil Factor Sf And The Charge Qc.P Required To Be On The Metal O-S-A To Keep Vh.c = -0.85 v : The ­ve charge QC.P. = ( CP-PE VP-PE - Q + ) required to keep metal Vh.c. = -0.85 v could be obtained in terms of the soil factor Sf. P All curves for all Boxes which correlate (Sf , Qtot.) Could be represented mostly by a trend line and by a 3rd order algebraic equation. The curves show, for the boxes have the same soil resistivity, as pH is decreased (H+), the charge Qtot. required is also increased i-e. corrosion is increased by the increase of the discharge rate of QP through CP-PE and cathodic protection is increased by the increase of ­ ve charge QC.P. on metal o.s.a. i.e Corrosion  +ve QP & C.P.  -ve QC.P.

A sample is shown bellow in fig. 17.
0 -10 0
n coulomb

VP PE

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

-20 -30 -40 -50 -60 -70 -80 -90

Qtot

Sf ohm.mt.
Fig. 17 QTOT. and Sf characteristic for boxes 1,2,3.

D. The Protection Current Ip And The Half Cell Voltage Vh.c : The linearity is obviously clear between the protection current IP and the correspondent half cell voltage Vh-c. It is also clear and logic that by the increase of the Humidity and pH factors (pHH, H+) i.e increase of soil factor Sf , the protection current is also increased for the same soil resistivity i.e. IP  -Vh.c A sample is shown bellow in fig. 18

9

0 -10 volt -1 -2 -3 Vh c -4 -5 -6 Ip m amp.
Fig. 18 Ip & Vh.c characteristic for box

0

10

20

30

40

50

E. The Soil Factor Sf And The Protection Current Ip at Vh.c= -0.85 v : The protection current for the minimum threshold of the cathadic protection at Vh.c =- 0.85v could be obtained in terms of the soil factor Sf by mostly a 3rd order algebriac equation. The curves show for all boxes that by the increase of the soil factor value, the demand of the protection current is increased. This is because the soil factor is increased by the following two factors: 1- Increasing of pH H i.e. H+ 2- Deterioration of insulation i.e. CP-PE  i.e IP = f( Sf )

a sample is shown bellow in fig. 19.
3
m amp IP PE

2.5 2 1.5 1 0.5 0 0 0.01 0.02 0.03 Sf ohm.mt. 0.04 0.05

Fig.19 Ip & Sf c/c at Vh.c= -0.85 volt for boxes 16,17,18.

F. The Half Cell Voltage Vh.C And The Pipe To Soil Potential VP.PE : The building up voltage VP-PE between pipe and earth is proportional to the voltage of the half cell Vh.c. i.e Vh.c  VP-PE

a sample is shown bellow in fig. 20
0 -12
volt

-10

-8

-6

-4

-2

-1 0 -2 -3 -4 -5 -6

2

V hc

VP PE

volt

Fig.20 Vh.c & VP-PE characteristic for box 9

G. The soil factor Sf and the min. Threshold of the Protection Current IPT at Vh.c = -0.85 v: If a tangent line is drew between the points of the maximums of the protection current IPT at minimum and maximum soil factor, this tangent line is considered the minimum threshold line to ensure that the C.P. level will not below the value -0.85V. i.e IP tang  Sf

The soil factor Sf and the minimum threshold of the protection currant IPtang at Vh.c = - 0.85 volt for 10 different boxes are shown bellow in fig. 21.

10

120
BOX 1

100 80
m amp

BOX 2 BOX 3 BOX 4 BOX 5 BOX 6

60 40 20 0 -0.2 -20 0 0.2 0.4 Sf ohm.mt. 0.6 0.8

BOX 7 BOX 8 BOX 9 BOX 10 Linear

H. The Soil Factor Sf And The Protection Current IP at Vh.c= - 0.2v  -2 v: The protection current IP could be represented in terms of the soil factor Sf and mostly by a 3rd order algebraic equations. The protection current is increased by the increase of pH H value at the same soil factor Sf value. X. THE EXPERIMENTAL ONION CURVE The onion curves are the curves of the protection current IP in terms of the soil factor Sf at different half cell voltage Vh.c level , it is possible to obtain the following:123The soil factor Sf if Vh.c and IP are known. (Soil characteristic) The half cell voltage Vh.c if Sf and IP are known (cathodic protection level). The protection current Ip if Sf and Vh.c are known. (for C.P. design principles)

Fig. 21 Approximate min-Protection current IP at half cell voltage = - 0.85 v for all soil resistivity under test.

If case number 2 to be considered, then by using an intelligent pig equipped with voltage drop canister to measure the voltage drop of a pipe line segment to get IP value and by measuring the parameters of r, pH, H and Log  of the soil to get the soil factor Where: r &  for the soil are measured at H=10% Then by using onion curves, the c.p. level of the pipe line segment could be obtained and the c.p. level of any buried pipeline could then be obtained. Fig. 22 Show a sample of the onion curve for the box 30.
100
-0.2 v

IP

80 60
m amp

-0.4 v -0.6 v -0.85 v -1 v -1.2 v

40 20

IP

-1.4 v -1.6 v

0 0 -20 -40 Sf ohm.mt.
Fig. 22 The onion curve of the box 30

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1

-1.8 v -2 v

X. DEDUCTION OF AN APPROXIMATE GENERAL EQUATION OF SEGMENT TOTAL CHARGE Qtot A. Deduction of the +ve charge QP To calculate the +ve charge QP created on metal o.s.a of a pipe line segment buried barely in the ground, consider a pipe line segment Lseg buried in a soil has a dielectric constant r, a soil resistivity  with power of hydrogen pH and humidity H % as shown in Fig. 23.

11

Fig. 23 Charge created on metal o.s.a due to surrounding medium effect

In case of no cathodic Protection systems are exist, the half cell voltage Vh-c is proportional to the +ve charge QP created on the metal o.s.a due to the surrounding medium effect and consequently Vh.c is proportional to the metal o.s.a while Vh.c is inversely proportional to the soil resistivity  . Q +  DLseg. p i.e. Vh.c.  log  as

log  

1 1  pHH S f

it is found that
+ QP =

C7 Vh .c DLseg . S f

(6)

Where : Q + metal o.s.a charge due to surrounding effect in coulomb P Vh-c half cell voltage (pipe-soil) using cu/cuso4 half cell in volt D diameter of the pipe segment in meter Lseg the length of the pipeline segment in meter  soil recistivity in ohm-meter Sf the soil factor

B. Deduction of the natural charge factor C7 The condition that: at IP = 0 Qtot. = C P - PE * VP - PE ) I P = 0 = Q + P
from the correspondent tables, the factor C7 could be deduced and the trend line of the factor C7 is shown in figure 24.

7.E-09 6.E-09 5.E-09 4.E-09 3.E-09 2.E-09 1.E-09 0.E+00 -1.E-09 0 -2.E-09

C7

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

Soil factor
Fig. 24 Natural charge factor C7 & Sf characteristics

C. Deduction Of The Cathodic Protection Charge QC.P Consider a pipeline have a diameter = D and it's length is divided into n equally Lseg buried barely in a soil have a soil resistivity . The system is cathodically protected by an impressed current technique. The ground bed of anodes dimension is LG.B. * D and is connected to the +ve terminal of the d-c power source. The ­ve terminal of the d-c power source is connected to the end of the pipeline at nLseg. The circulating current IP takes place. The system as in fig.25 .

12

Fig. 25 Total charge on metal o.s.a due to surrounding Medium and cathodic protection effect.

For each Lseg, the circulating current is inversely proportion to the total resistance between the ground bed and the line segment, while IP is proportional to the charge QC.P It is found that :   S + - DL -A (L + LG.B) + F (R + RC + RC + RA ) P seg H C6    .I (7) QC.P = C11  P SF Where : Perpendicular distance between line segment and ground bed pipe in mt LP-A LG.B : Length of ground bed in mt RH : Ground bed header resistance in  - RC : -ve feed back cable resistance in 
+ C

: +ve cable resistance from d-c source to the ground bed header in  : Total anodes resistance RA C6 : f (1/Sf )

D. Deduction of the cathodic protection factor C11 Say the condition that at Vh-c = -0.85V , VP-PE could be obtained from (VP-PE & Vh-c ) curves while IP could be obtained from (IP & VP-PE) curves
As Qtot = Q + + Q C.P P
+ P

(8)

QC.P = CP-PE * VP-PE - Q (9) then the factor C11 could be deduced and the trend line of C11 is shown in Fig. 26
0.1 0 -0.1 0 -0.2 -0.3 -0.4 -0.5 -0.6

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

C11

Soil factor

Fig. 26 The C.P factor C11 & Sf characteristics

E. Segment Total Charge Qtot From equation (6) , (7) & (8) , Qtot is equal to:
  SF + - DLP- A (Lseg + LG.B ) + (RH + RC + RC + RA ) C6 Vh.c  .I CP-PE * VP-PE = C7 . + C11  (10) P SF DLseg. SF As the onion experimental curves and onion theoretical curves approximately the same which proves that the total charge Qtot is equal to the stray capacitance CP-PE * the voltage VP-PE to the remote earth. The comparison between practical and theoretical onion curves of box 1 as an example is shown in Fig. 27.

13

10.0 8.0 6.0
m amp

-0.2 v -0.4 v -0.6 v -0.85 v -1 v -1.2 v -1.4 v 0 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 -1.6 v -1.8 v Soil factor -2 v

4.0 2.0 0.0 -2.0 -4.0

IP

10.0 8.0 6.0
m amp

-0.2 v -0.4 v -0.6 v -0.85 v -1 v -1.2 v -1.4 v

4.0 2.0

IP

0.0 0 -2.0 -4.0 Sf ohm.mt. 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05

-1.6 v -1.8 v -2 v

Fig. 27 The practical and theoretical onion curves of Box 1

XI.CONCLUSION The proposed electric theory of corrosion is depending on the concept of the +ve charge QP created on the outer surface area of the buried pipe line due to the building up potential VP-PE between the pipe and the remote earth. The created charge QP is dissipated to the surrounding medium (corrosion process) through a stray capacitance CP-PE between the pipe and coaxial imaginary cylindrical earth. The dielectric constant of the soil r2 of the stray capacitance act with the dielectric constant of the pipe coating material r1as a cylindrical capacitor with compound dielectric. As r1of the coating material is decreased, the total capacitor is decreased (two capacitors are in series), then charge Q = C x V is decreased i.e. corrosion process is decreased. If deterioration of coating material occurred, then r1 is increased i.e. total capacitance of the compound dielectric is increased i.e. corrosion process is increased as the created charge on metal outer surface area Q will be increased. For the pipeline cathodically integrity, many parameters affect directly on the cathodic protection level. The relation ship between all parameters are combined in a new factor called the soil factor Sf = (1/Ks) pHH Log  which could be obtained by a direct measurement from the field. The importance of the Sf factor is to get the cathodic protection level Vh.c along the pipe line at any pipeline segment if the protection current IP passed through such segment is measured. IP could be obtained by adding a voltage drop canister with the intelligent pig to measure V segment. By using the onion curves which define the relationship between the soil factor Sf, current passed through pipelines segment IP and the correspondent C.P. level, any unknown factor from (Vh.c , IP, SF) could be obtained from the other two known factors.

14

