1 
 
Corrosion Inhibition of Mild Steel by using Banana Peel Extract 
C. Bala Manikandana, S.Balamuruganb, P.Balamuruganc, C.Thanga Priyad 
 
a Â² Department of Mechanical Engineering, Mepco Schlenk Engineering College, Sivakasi. 
email: balamani1991@gmail.com 
 b Â² Department of Mechanical Engineering, AAA College of Engineering & Technology, 
Sivakasi. email: kkrbala@gmail.com 
 c Â² Department of Mechanical Engineering, Mepco Schlenk Engineering College, Sivakasi. 
email: mechbala2009@gmail.com 
d    - Department of Chemistry, Sri Kaliswari College, Sivakasi. email: prichem1986@gmail.com 
 
  Abstract 
  Corrosion  is  the  deterioration  of  metal  by  chemical  attack  or  reaction  with  its 
environment.  It  is  a continuous  problem, diÆ¥cult  to  eliminate  completely.  The  cost  of 
metallic  corrosion  to  the  total  economy  is  in  billions  of  rupees  per  year. The inhibiting 
action of the banana peel extract as a corrosion inhibitor in controlling corrosion of mild 
steel in 0.1M HCl solution was studied. Corrosion inhibition was identified by employing 
weight  loss  measurements  and  electrochemical  techniques.  Five  samples  of  mild  steel 
specimen were  taken  and  they  are  subjected  to  varying  concentration  of  banana peel 
extract  solution  for  analyzing  the  inhibitory properties.  The  protective  film  has  been 
analyzed using FTIR spectroscopic techniques. The results indicated that the corrosion rate 
is decreasing as the concentration of banana peel increases and simultaneously it enhances 
the inhibition efficiency of the mild steel. 
Key words: Mild steel, Banana peel extract, Corrosion inhibition, Corrosion rate, Weight loss 
measurements, Electrochemical techniques. 
1. Introduction 
         Mild  steel founds  its  applications  in  the  field  of  construction  in  wide  range  of 
industries due to its high strength and availability at low cost. The main setback for mild 
steel is its tendency to corrode easily in an acidic environment. Inorganic acids like HCl and 
à¬¶3Cà¬¸ are  used  for  drilling,  fracturing  and  acid  stimulations  at  various  stages  in  oil 
exploration, production and/or descaling operations, which leads to a significant amount of 
corrosion. Several protective measures are to be taken. One of them is being the use of 
corrosion inhibitors. Corrosion inhibitors are surface active compounds that are added in 
small quantities to stop metal dissolution by a corrosive environment. Corrosion inhibitions 
2 
 
by  organic  compounds  are  widely  used  in  industries.  Most  organic  inhibitors  control 
corrosion by adsorption of inhibitor molecules on the metal surface forming thin films. The 
use of inhibitors is one the most practical methods for the protection of metals in acidic 
media. However, most of organic inhibitors are harmful and toxic to the environment. This 
has led to  the  need  for  natural  products  which  are  eco-friendly  and  harmless.  Several 
investigators have reported the use of natural inhibitors, which were extracted from plant 
leaves or seeds. [1]. Taleb H. Ibrahim et al.  investigated about the corrosion of mild steel 
using Potato Peel Extract in 2M HCl by weight loss and electrochemical techniques. It was 
observed that the increase in the inhibition efficiency with increasing potato peels extract 
concentration. A reasonable corrosion inhibition level was obtained at a concentration of 50 
ppm at higher temperatures (>70% inhibition efficiency) [2]. S.A.Umoren et al. found that 
corrosion of mild steel using leaf and stem extracts in 1 M H2SO4, there is a significant 
corrosion inhibition and the inhibition increases with increase in concentration of leaf and 
stem  extracts [3]. Deepa  Rani.P  et  al. identified  corrosion  inhibitor  and  reported  its 
inhibiting properties by weight loss measurements at various times and temperature. The 
inhibition efficiency is markedly higher in a Natural sea water environment with the addition 
of Emblica officinalis leaves extract compared with those in the inhibitor free solution. The 
inhibition efficiency increased with increase of inhibitor concentration [4]. M.S.Al-Otaibi et 
al. tested the Corrosion inhibitory action of some plant extracts on the corrosion of mild 
steel  in  acidic  media.  Using  polarization  studies,  it  was  found  that  the  extracts  of  A. 
Sieberi, T. Auriculatum, C. Tinctorius, L. Shawii and O. Baccatus plants serves as an effective 
green corrosion inhibitors for mild steel in 0.5M HCl media [5]. A.Anejjar et al. found the 
Inhibition of  carbon  steel  corrosion  in  1M  HCl  medium  by  potassium  thiocyanate.  The 
inhibition  efficiency  of  potassium  thiocyanate  (KSCN)  depends  on  temperature  and 
increases with increasing of the KSCN concentration[6]. Aprael S. Yaro et al. demonstrated 
the  Apricot  juice  as  green  corrosion  inhibitor  of  mild  steel  in  phosphoric  acid.  The 
maximum corrosion inhibition efficiency of apricot juice on mild steel is 75% at 30Â°C. From 
Statistical  analysis,  it was identified  that  the  corrosion  rate  depends  on  temperature, 
inhibitor concentration and the combined effect of these two parameters [7]. DeepaPrabhu 
et  al. studied  about  the  Corrosion behavior  of  6063  Aluminium  alloy  in  acidic  and  in 
alkaline media. The corrosion rate was increased by the following factors: Increase in the 
temperature,  Increase  in  concentration  of  sodium  hydroxide  medium  and  phosphoric 
medium. Sodium hydroxide medium induces more corrosion on 6063 Aluminium alloy than 
the  phosphoric  acid  medium [8]. Mahmoud  N.  EL-Haddad  et  al. tested the  use of 
Hydroxyethylcellulose as an eco-friendly inhibitor for 1018 c-steel corrosion in 3.5% NaCl 
solution. Corrosion inhibition decreases when the temperature increases for 1018 c-steel in 
3.5% sodium chloride solution by hydroxyethylcellulose [9]. E.UwahI et al. found out the 
3 
 
Inhibitive action of ethanol extracts from Nauclealatifolia on the corrosion of mild steel in 
H2SO4 solutions and their adsorption characteristics. The inhibition efficiency was directly 
proportional to the concentration and inversely proportional to the temperature [10]. K. K. 
Alaneme  et  al. analyzed the  Corrosion  inhibition  and  adsorption  mechanism  studies  of 
Hunteria  umbellata  seed  husk  extracts  on  mild  steel  immersed  in  acidic  solutions.  The 
effect of corrosion inhibition of mild steel increases with increase in extract concentration 
of  H.umbellata  seed  husk  in  1M  HCl  and  1M  H2SO4 and  reduces  with  increase  in 
temperature [11]. I. Adejoro et al. evaluated the Corrosion inhibition potentials of ampicillin 
for mild steel in hydrochloric acid solution. It is noted that an antibiotic drug Ampicillin 
behaves  as  a  good  inhibitor  for  mild  steel  in  acid  medium.  The  inhibition  efficiency  is 
directly proportional to the concentration of ampicillin and indirectly proportional to the 
temperature. This gives the highest inhibition efficiency 0f 75.85% in the concentration of 
5Ã—10Ã¬3M at 30Â°C [12]. 
 
In the present study, the inhibition of corrosion of mild steel in 0.1M HCl aqueous 
solution  by  banana  peel  extract  was  investigated  using  weight  loss  method  and 
electrochemical  measurements  such  as  linear  polarization  resistance  (LPR).  The  inhibitor 
active components within the banana peel extract were investigated using FTIR. 
 
2. Experimentation 
2.1. Preparation of Banana Peel Powder 
Banana peel was cut into small sizes of 2 Â² 3 cm and cleaned with water. To remove 
the moisture content, the banana peel was exposed to sunlight for 7 days and dried in hot 
air oven for 2 hours at 100Â°C. Finally it was heated to 300Â°C in the furnace for 30 minutes. 
Then the heated peel was grinded to fine powder.  
2.2. Preparation of Extract Solution: 
 10g of banana peel powder was taken and mixed with 170 ml of distilled water. The 
banana peel powder was refluxed to make the extract solution for coating. The powdered 
sample was refluxed in distilled water at 80Â°C, until 70 ml of extract solution was obtained. 
The extract solution was poured in Petri Disc. The function of Petri Disc is to transfer the 
solution  from  liquid  to  solid  state.  The  obtained  powder  was  taken  and  kept  open  in 
atmospheric conditions for three days.  
 
4 
 
 
2.3. Specimen Preparation: 
Mild steel C1018 has the  composition of  (0.20% of  Mn;  0.9% of  Ni;  0.022% of  P; 
0.004% of S; 0.05% of Si and the balance is iron) was chosen for the study. The specimen 
size for the corrosion inhibition coating was 1.0 cm * 4.0 cm * 0.2 cm and a surface area of 
15.9 cm2. The specimen surface was cleaned and polished with different grades of emery 
paper. The specimens were degreased using ethanol, followed by immersion in nitric acid 
solution for two minutes to activate the surface. Afterwards, the surface was washed using 
doubled-distilled water, followed by rinsing with acetone. Acetone is a polar substance that 
dissolves almost all organic compounds. Finally specimens were dried and weighed.  
 
2.4. Corrosion Inhibition Process: 
               20 ml of distilled water was mixed with 2 mg of extract powder to get 200 ppm of 
extract solution. Similarly the various concentrations of extract solution ranging between         
100 - 500  ppm  were  prepared. The  corrosion  inhibited  specimen  was  prepared  by dip 
coating method. The mild steel specimen was dipped into the extract solutions in a beaker 
and covered with aluminium foil for seven days at atmospheric conditions. After the seven 
days, the inhibited specimen was taken out and gently rinsed with distilled water. Finally, it 
was  dried  and  weighed.  The  weight  of  the  specimen  increases  due  to  the  coating  of 
concentration solution. 
 
2.5 Testing Methods: 
2.5.1 Weight Loss Method: 
  Pre-weighed mild steel specimens were immersed in 250 ml of 0.1M HCl solution. 
The specimens were left immersed for 24 hours in a temperature of 25Â°C. Before taking 
weight-loss measurements, the metal specimens were washed with doubled-distilled water, 
immersed in 20% à¬¶3Cà¬¸ for 1 minute, washed thoroughly with water and ethanol, and then 
dried before reading their weights. Inhibition efficiency was calculated using the following 
relationship, 
Inhibition Efficiency (%)  =  àµŒ à­›à°¬à¬¿[à°­
à­›à°¬ Ã—100  
Where,  7à¬´ - Weight of the mild steel specimen without banana peel coating, 7à¬µ - Weight of 
the mild steel specimen with banana peel coating. 
 
5 
 
 
2.5.2 Corrosion Rate 
Corrosion rate (CR) was calculated by assuming uniform corrosion over the entire 
surface of the specimens. Corrosion rate determination (the rate at which a given metal 
&/or  alloy) in  a  specific  environment  is  of  fundamental  importance  in  corrosion 
Engineering. The  corrosion rate  in  millimetre  per  year  (mm/y)  was  calculated  from  the 
weight loss method, using this formula, 
                                             CR = à¯
:HHEHr;àµˆ  
Where, W - weight  loss  in  grams, K - constant  (87.6), D - metal  density  in  (g/cm3),               
A - Specimen area (inch2), T - time (hrs). 
2.5.3 Electrochemical Corrosion Test 
Electrochemical corrosion testing measures and/or controls the potential and current 
of oxidation/reduction reactions. The cell was filled with 600 ml of 2M HCl. The Gill AC 
Potentiostat supplied by ACM Instruments was used for the electrochemical measurement 
test. The electrochemical test was performed on inhibited specimens of banana peel extract 
concentrations ranging from 100 to 500 ppm. For the linear polarization resistance (LPR) 
test, the start potential was 10 mV, and the finish potential was -10 mV with respect to the 
open circuit potential. In actual practice, the polarization curve becomes linear on a semi 
logarithmic plot, at approximately 50 mV more active than the corrosion potential. This 
region of linearity is referred to as the Tafel region. To determine the corrosion rate from 
such polarization measurements, the Tafel region is extrapolated to the corrosion potential. 
At the corrosion potential, the anodic and cathodic reaction rate is equal and this point 
corresponds to the corrosion rate of the system expressed in terms of current density. 
 
2.5.4 FTIR Spectroscopy 
  A Small portion of Banana peel extract was left to air dry overnight followed by 
complete  drying  in  a  vacuum  oven.  A  KBr pellet  was  made  from  the  dry  extract  and 
characterized by a Bomem MB-3000 FT-IR equipped with ZnSe optics and a DTGS detector. 
Spectrum  was  obtained  at  4  cm-1 resolution  and  200  scans. The  FTIR  spectrum  of  the 
natural  banana  peel  sample  was  determined  to identify  carboxyl  and  hydroxyl  groups 
present in it. 
 
 
6 
 
3. Results and Discussion 
3.1 Characterization of Banana Peel Powder: 
FTIR  spectroscopy  of  banana  peel  powder  was  obtained  by  using  (Perkin  Elmer 
System 2000) spectrometer under ambient conditions. The C=C stretching frequency has 
decreased from 1638 cm-1 to 1626 cm-1  ULQJ Â´2Âµ VPUHPÅƒOLQJ IUHTXHQÅƒ\ OMV VOLIPHG IURP   
1051 cm-1  to 1105 cm-1 , NH stretching frequency has decreased from 3435 cm-1  to 3412  
cm-1 .  
 
Figure. 1 FTIR image of Banana Peel Powder 
Figure. 1 indicates that the Nitrogen atom of NH group has coordinated with 	Â‡à¬¶> 
formed on the metal surface resulting in the formation of 	Â‡à¬¶? BPE complex on the metal 
surface. 
 The adsorption characteristics of these materials are mainly due to the presence of 
hydroxyl groups and carboxyl functions present on pectin substances. The characterization 
results showed that banana peel act as a bio-sorbent having very high specific surface area, 
potential binding sites and functional groups. 
 
3.2. SEM Image of Banana Peel Powder: 
The banana peel powder structure was observed using scanning electron microscopy 
as shown in Figure. 2. The peel has an irregular and porous surface. The many pores on its 
surface support the adsorption process. 

7 
 
 
Figure. 2 SEM image of Banana Peel Powder 
3.3 Weight Loss Measurements: 
In the specimens, the banana peel extract concentration was varied from 100 ppm 
up to 500 ppm. Graph for the Inhibition efficiency of mild steel versus the concentration of 
extraction solution was plotted, as shown in Figure. 3. The inhibition efficiency of mild steel 
increases with the increase in extract solution concentrations. 
 
Figure. 3 Inhibition Efficiency Vs Extract Solution Concentrations 
 
3.4 Corrosion Rate: 
The Corrosion rate was calculated using weight loss method. Relationship between 
Corrosion rate and the concentration of extract solutions was plotted as shown in Figure. 4. 
It infers that the corrosion rate of mild steel decreases as the banana peel concentration 
goes on increasing from 100 Â² 500 ppm. 
 


8 
 
 
Figure. 4 Concentration of Extract solution Vs Corrosion rate 
 
3.5 Comparison of Inhibition Efficiency and Corrosion Rate 
Figure. 5 Concentration of Extract solution Vs Corrosion rate and Inhibition Efficiency 
The inhibition efficiencies were calculated. Plot of Concentration of Extract Solution 
versus the Corrosion Rate and Inhibition Efficiency was created as shown in Figure. 5. The 
plot infers that the corrosion rate reduces as the concentration of extract solution increases 
from  100 Â² 500  ppm  and  the  Inhibition efficiency  increases with  the  concentration  of 
extract solution increases from 100 Â² 500 ppm. Concentration of extract solution is directly 


9 
 
proportional to the Inhibition efficiency and inversely proportional to the Corrosion rate, up 
to 500 ppm.  
3. 6 TAFEL Potential Graph: 
Corrosion  inhibition  property  of  the  uncoated  and  coated  mild  steel  was  studied 
from  the  electrochemical  polarization  studies.  The  electrochemical  polarization studies 
were  tested  by  measuring  the  electrode  potential  of  un-coated  and  coated  mild  steel 
specimen by immersing in 3.5% NaCl solution for about one hour.  
Uncoated  mild  steel  specimen  exhibits  Ecorr value  at -0.6741V  versus  Ag/AgCl.  It 
shows that the mild steel corrosion potential is higher negative potential. For the coated 
steel specimens, the corrosion potential shifts (Ecorr value at -0.5852V versus Ag/Agcl) to 
positive side. Tafel potential graph was plotted for the un-coated mild steel and coated 
mild steel specimens of extract solution concentrations varying from 100 Â² 500 ppm as 
shown in Figure. 6.  
The shifting of magnitudes in Tafel plot describes about the substantiate corrosion 
protecting ability of  the  coated  specimen, when  compared  with  the  uncoated  specimen. 
These results clearly infer the fact that the banana peel extract possess excellent corrosion 
protecting ability. 
 
Figure. 6 Tafel Potential Graph for uncoated and coated specimens 
 

10 
 
4. Conclusions  
Mild steel was coated with banana peel extract powder for corrosion inhibition. The 
inhibition efficiency of mild steel in 0.1M HCL increases with the increasing in concentration 
of banana peel inhibitor. Inhibition efficiency up to 87% was achieved. Comparison of the 
analysis  of  corrosion  inhibition  has  been  carried  out  by  using  both  weight  loss  and 
electrochemical  method.  The  results  indicated  that  the  corrosion  rate  decreases, as  the 
concentration  of  banana  peel inhibitor increases  and  simultaneously  it enhances  the 
inhibition efficiency of the mild steel. 
Acknowledgement 
        The  authors  would  like  to  gratefully  acknowledge  the  technical  support  from  the 
Mepco Schlenk Engineering College, Sivakasi. 
References 
L1@ Â¶Recent Natural Corrosion Inhibitors for Mild Steel: An OverviewÂ· Marko Chigondo and 
Fidelis Chigondo, Journal of Chemistry, 2016. 
[2] Â¶Corrosion Inhibition of Mild Steel using Potato Peel Extract in 2M HCl SolutionÂ· Taleb H. 
Ibrahim,  Youssef Chehade1  and  Mohamed  AbouZour, International  journal  of 
electrochemical science, 6, pp6542 Â² 6556, 2011. 
L3@ Â¶Corrosion inhibition of leaf and stem extracts of Sida acuta for mild steel in 1M H2SO4 
solutions investigated by chemical and spectroscopic techniquesÂ· Umoren.S.A, Eduok.U.M 
and Solomon.A.P., Arabian Journal of Chemistry, 9, 1, ppS209 Â² S224, 2016. 
L4@ Â¶Emblica Officinalis (AMLA) leaves extract as corrosion inhibitor for copper and its alloy 
(CU-27ZN) in natural sea waterÂ·, Deepa Rani.P and Selvaraj.S, Archives of Applied Science 
Research, 2, 6, pp140-150, 2010. 
LD@ Â¶Corrosion inhibitory action of some plant extracts on the corrosion of mild steel in 
acidic  mediaÂ·, Al-Otaibi.M.S,  Al-Mayouf.A.M,  Khan.M,  Mousa.A.A,  Al-Mazroa.S.A  and 
Alkhathlan.H.Z, Arabian Journal of Chemistry, 7, 3, pp340 Â² 346, 2014. 
L6@  Â¶Inhibition  of  carbon  steel  corrosion  in  1M  HCl  medium  by  potassium  thiocyanateÂ·, 
Anejjar.A, Salghi.R, Zarrouk.A, Benali.O, Zarrok.H, Hammouti.B and Ebenso.E.E, Journal of 
the Association of Arab Universities for Basic and Applied Sciences, 15, pp21 Â² 27, 2014. 
L7@  Â¶Apricot  juice  as  green  corrosion  inhibitor  of  mild  steel  in  phosphoric  acidÂ·, 
Aprael.S.Yaro, Anees.A. Khadom and Rafal.K.Wael, Alexandria Engineering Journal, 52, 1, 
pp129-135, 2013. 
11 
 
L8@  Â¶Corrosion  behaviour  of  6063  aluminium  alloy  in  acidic  and  in  alkaline  mediaÂ·, 
DeepaPrabhu and Padmalatha Rao, Arabian Journal of Chemistry, 10, 2, ppS2234-S2244, 
2017. 
LE@ Â¶Hydroxyethylcellulose used as an eco-friendly inhibitor for 1018 c-steel corrosion in 
3.5% NaCl solutionÂ·, Mahmoud.N and EL-Haddad, Carbohydrate Polymers, 112, pp595-602, 
2014. 
L10@  Â¶Inhibitive  action  of  ethanol  extracts  from  Nauclealatifolia  on  the  corrosion  of  mild 
steel  in  H2SO4 solutions  and  their  adsorption  characteristicsÂ·, Uwah.I.E,  Okafor.P.C  and 
Ebiekpe.V.E,  Arabian Journal of Chemistry, 6, 3, pp285-293, 2013. 
L11@ Â¶Corrosion inhibition and adsorption mechanism studies of Hunteria umbellata seed 
husk extracts on mild steel immersed in acidic solutionsÂ·, Alaneme.K.K, Olusegun.S.J and 
Adelowo.O.T, Alexandria Engineering Journal, 55, 1, pp673-681, 2016. 
L12@  Â¶Corrosion  inhibition  potentials  of  ampicillin  for  mild  steel  in  hydrochloric  acid 
solutionÂ·, Adejoro.I,  Ojo.F  and  Obafemi.S, Journal of  Taibah  University  for Science, 9, 2, 
pp196-202, 2015. 