Monitoring of the External Corrosion of Buried Pipelines 
 
A.I. Marshakov, M.A. Petrunin, V.E. Ignatenko, Ɍ.A. Nenasheva, Ɍ.A. Yurasova, L.B. 
Maksaeva, A.A. Rybkin 
A.N. Frumkin Institute of Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry Russian Academy 
of Sciences, 31 Leninsky prospect, Moscow GSP-1, 119071 Russian Federation. 
Email: tnenasheva@inbox.ru (T.A. Nenasheva) 
Received: 
Abstract 
The  methods  for the monitoring  of  various  types  of  external  corrosion  of 
underground  pipelines  are investigated.  The  various  scenarios  where  electrical 
resistance soil corrosion probes can be used for corrosion damage assessment or 
for the control of cathodic protection effectiveness are described. The possibilities 
of  using  hydrogen probes  for the prediction  of  stress  corrosion  cracking  of 
pipelines are discussed. 
Key words: pipeline, cathodic protection, corrosion monitoring  
2 
 
1. Introduction 
Currently, the main methods for monitoring the corrosion state of underground 
pipelines  are  electrometric diagnostics  with  control  excavations  and  in-line 
inspection. The use of these methods requires heavy financial expenditures; hence, 
the development  of PHPORGV  IRU  POH  LQGLUHŃPµ  GHPHUPLQMPLRQ  RI  POH  ŃRUURVLRQ 
state and protection efficiency of pipelines is attractive. Principally, this problem 
can be solved by statistical analysis and mathematical simulation models relating 
cases of the corrosion failures of pipelines to their design features, age, operating 
conditions, data on geological types, chemical composition and microbial activity 
of the soils,  and  cathodic  protection  parameters [1].  However,  the  number  of 
factors taken into account in such models is too large, and the currently available 
databases  lack sufficient data  for  the  development  of  mathematical  models of 
high reliability. In view of this, the main goals in the development of the theory of 
pipe steel corrosion in soil is to determine the main factors in the origination and 
growth  of  various  types  of  corrosion  defects  and to develop  methods for  their 
monitoring along the route of existing pipelines. 
The common goals of corrosion monitoring (CM) of underground pipelines are to 
determine the following parameters: 
1) The corrosivity of the soil and/or under-film electrolyte toward various types of 
corrosion damage to the pipe steel; 
2) The corrosion  risk  for  a  pipeline  segment,  namely, the presence  of  galvanic 
macropairs, stray currents, and induced alternating currents; 
3) The state of the isolating coating; 
4) The efficiency of the pipeline cathodic protection (CP). 
The following parameters are of major importance in the nucleation of local types 
of corrosion: the state of pipe surface, the presence of non-metallic inclusions and 
metallurgical defects in the pipe steel, and the magnitude and frequency of the 
3 
 
mechanical strains in the pipe. It is unlikely that all factors affecting the growth of 
various corrosion defects can be monitored on existing pipelines. Therefore, under 
actual  operation  cRQGLPLRQV  MQ\  LQGLUHŃPµ  GLMJQRVPLŃ  PHPORGV  RLOO provide a 
SURNMNLOLVPLŃ HVPLPMPH RI POH SLSHOLQH·V ŃRUURVLRQ VPMPHB +RRHYHU VPXGLHV RQ  POH 
mechanisms and kinetics of the underground corrosion of pipe steel will improve 
the reliability of such estimates. 
An LGHMOµ  SMVVLYH  SLSHOLQH  SURPHŃPLRQ, excluding  any  contact  of  the  metal  with 
electrolytes and preventing the origination of any corrosion defects, theoretically 
makes it unnecessary to know the corrosion mechanism of pipe steel in soils. The 
use  of  factory-applied  coatings  has  made  it  possible  to significantly  reduce 
pipeline  corrosion  damage.  However, some mechanical  damage  to  the  pipe 
insulation  during  transportation,  pipeline  assembly  and  operation is  inevitable. 
"WHMNHUµ ŃRMPLQJV MUH XVed when insulating pipe joints under field conditions, and 
the protective properties of coatings degrade over prolonged pipeline operation. 
Hence, monitoring the pipe outer surface corrosion remains a problem of current 
interest, even where modern isolation pipeline coatings are used. 
 Determination of the state of the pipeline insulating coating is an important 
part of CM; however, this issue will not be covered in this communication because 
methods  for  monitoring  the  insulation  quality  are well-known  and have  been 
described [2-4]. 
1.1. Types  of  corrosion  damage  and  general  principles  of  their 
control 
At  the  first  stage  of  organising  the  CM,  one  needs  to  determine what types  of 
corrosion  damage  to  the  pipeline  outer  wall are to  be  monitored. From  the 
viewpoint of the electrochemical process mechanism, only three types of external 
pipeline corrosion can be distinguished: uniform corrosion, crevice corrosion, and 
stress corrosion cracking. 
4 
 
Uniform underground corrosion is an arbitrary term because it implies that the 
metal surface is equipotential, its structure is uniform, and the corrosion medium 
is homogeneous and has a uniform composition. None of the three conditions are 
met in the underground corrosion of real-life steel structures. However, the rate of 
uniform corrosion determined, e.g., from the mass loss of a check specimen, can 
be used for comparative assessment of the soil corrosivity and efficiency of the 
electrochemical protection. 
Crevice corrosion is the most widespread type of underground corrosion of steel 
structures; it is impossible without a potential difference between two areas of a 
pipe  surface.  Differences  in  the  electrode  potential  appear  for  various  reasons: 
stray currents in the soil, operation of macro corrosion cells formed by parts of a 
pipeline  buried  in  soils  with  differing  chemical  compositions  or  degrees of 
aeration,  operation  of  galvanic  elements  at  the  level  of  ground  waters  or  in  a 
crevice between a pipe surface and a delaminated insulating coating, etc. 
Stress corrosion cracking is currently the most hazardous type of underground 
corrosion of high-pressure gas pipelines. The origination and growth of a crevice 
in  a  metal  is  determined  by  a  combination  of  three  factors: the magnitude  of 
mechanical stress, the alloy structure and composition, and composition of the 
corrosive medium. 
The  other  known  types  of  local  corrosion,  such  as  pitting  or  intergranular 
corrosion,  are  not  typical in underground  pipelines.  It  is  possible  that  such 
corrosion defects appear at the early growth stages of a crack or crevice. 
Local  corrosion  defects  can  be  initiated  either  in  a  coating  defect  or  under  a 
delaminated coating. The CM methods will differ depending on the location of the 
corrosion defect. 
At the second stage of organising the CM, methods for monitoring the possibility 
of the origination and/or growth rate of corrosion sites are defined. There are two 
5 
 
approaches to address this problem. The first one is to use methods that directly 
measure the metal mass loss or corrosion penetration depth. This goal is achieved 
using  probes  whose  working  electrodes undergo  corrosion  under  conditions 
VLPLOMU  PR  POH  ŃRUURVLRQ  ŃRQGLPLRQV  RI  POH  SLSH·V  RXPVLGH  RMOOB  7OH  VHŃRQG 
approach  is  to  monitor  the  factors  that  cause  the  initiation  and  growth  of  a 
corrosion site, namely: the pipe potential, the chemical composition of the soil (or 
under-film)  electrolyte,  and  changes  in  the  metal  properties  that  accompany 
corrosion. The second CM approach requires knowledge of the origination reasons 
and the growth mechanism of a corrosion site. As this knowledge is accumulated, 
ideas  about  the  critical  values  of  the  factors  being  monitored  change,  and 
sometimes the question arises: do we monitor the right factor? 
The choice of the factor to be monitored is determined not only by the existence 
of an unambiguous functional relationship between this factor and the external 
corrosion rate of the pipeline but also by the cost of the measurements. From this 
point of view, indirect monitoring methods are generally advantageous. 
1.2. Measuring the potential of pipeline segments 
Currently, the efficiency of pipeline electrochemical protection is monitored using 
the  protective  potential  value. The  electrode  potential  is  an  indirect  parameter 
characterizing the metal corrosion rate; hence, the CP protective potential is also 
an indirect parameter that characterizes the pipeline protection level. What are the 
grounds for this statement? 
In the first stage of the development of the scientific bases of the method for the 
electrochemical protection of steel structures in soils and natural waters, attempts 
were made to give a thermodynamic substantiation to the protective potential, i.e., 
to relate this value with the equilibrium potential of iron, E0 (SHE): 
Fe ĺ Fe2+ + 2Ɲ, E0 =- 0.44 V + (RT/2F) ln[Fe2+]   (1) 
6 
 
At first sight, this approach appears to be justified if one sets a permissible rate 
for the diffusion transfer of iron ions to the electrolyte bulk and thus defines the 
maximum  permissible  concentration  of  iron  cations  at  the  metal  surface 
Baeckmann  and  Schwenk [5]. However, Equation  (1)  fails  to  account for the 
participation  of  electrolyte  components  in  the  iron  dissolution  reaction 
Florianovich [6] and, in  particular,  the  possible  formation  of  hardly-soluble 
corrosion products. In fact, considering that iron hydroxide is formed on the metal 
surface, the equilibrium potential of the anodic reaction can be determined as: 
Fe + 2OH- ĺ Fe(OH)2 + 2Ɲ,  E0 = ²0.877 V ² (RT/F) ln[OH-]   (2) 
Equation (2) should occur upon alkalization of the near-electrode solution layer 
due to the cathodic reduction of oxygen or water. 
Natural soils contain activators of iron anodic dissolution, e.g., CO3
2-(HCO3
-) and S2- 
(HS-) anions,  which  shift  E0 in  the  negative  direction  as  their  concentration  is 
increased. Calculation of E0 for the formation of iron carbonate and sulphide gives 
by Equations (3) and (4): 
Fe + CO3
2- ĺ FeCO3 + 2Ɲ,  E0 = ²0.756 V  ² (RT/2F) ln[CO3
2-]   (3) 
Fe +  S2- ĺ FeS + 2Ɲ, E0 = ²0.95 V ² (RT/2F) ln[S2-]   (4) 
The thermodynamic substantiation of the protective potential value became even 
less justified after  the  development  of  the  concept  of the chemical  coupling  of 
partial corrosion reactions [7]. Chemical coupling implies that a fraction of the free 
energy  produced  by  one  reaction  compensates for the  energy  consumption  by 
another  (induced)  reaction.  As  a  result,  the  quasi-equilibrium  potential  of  the 
induced reaction shifts in the negative direction. A possible mechanism of chemical 
coupling  of the partial  corrosion  reactions  involves  the  participation  of  the 
intermediates  of  the  oxidant  reduction  in  the  anodic  process. Oxygen-containing 
oxidants (which form OH- ions upon reduction) accelerate iron dissolution in acidic 
media (pH 1-3) at a constant potential, with an acceleration factor of several tens [8-
7 
 
9].  In  weakly- acidic  and  neutral  electrolytes,  the  accelerating  effect  of  oxygen-
containing oxidants weakens or is not observed. However, even in pH-neutral media, 
iron  dissolution  would  be  accelerated  in  the  presence  of sulphur- or  nitrogen-
containing  compounds  that  are  reduced  to  give sulphide ions  or  ammonia 
molecules. 
Thus, the metal dissolution rate is not solely a function of potential because it also 
depends on the composition of the corrosive medium and on the rates of other 
electrode  reactions.  The  currently  accepted  range  of  protective  potentials  for 
pipelines  (-0.85  to -1.15 V  vs.  CSE)  has  been  established  empirically,  based  on 
results of long-term practical electrochemical protection of steel structures. The 
effect  of  the  corrosion  medium  composition  on  the  electrochemical  kinetics  of 
iron dissolution is taken into account when establishing the minimum protective 
potential, which either increases (in absolute magnitude) to -0.95 V in soils with 
microbiological activity or decreases to -0.75 V in low-mineralised high-resistivity 
soils [10].  
Despite  the  absence  of  theoretical  substantiations  of  the  protective  potential, 
monitoring  this  value  along  a  pipeline versus time  is  currently  the  basis  for 
determining  the  electrochemical  protection  efficiency  of  underground  pipelines. 
However, this criterion of electrochemical protection efficiency has one significant 
drawback: its value does not ensure a quantitative determination of the residual 
corrosion  rate  of  the  outside  pipe  wall.  As  a  rule,  this  results  in  considerable 
financial expense required to maintain too negative protective potentials; however, 
in certain cases, the lack of knowledge of the residual corrosion rate may result in 
the origination of hazardous corrosion defects on the outside pipe wall in a hole 
of the isolating coating. 
Furthermore,  considerable  difficulties  exist  in the protective  potential 
measurements of a pipeline segment, primarily due to the compensation of the 
ohmic component (IR) in the measured potential value. First, due to the existence 
8 
 
of the IR-component, the potential that is established on the metal in real modes 
of electrochemical protection depends on the area of a hole in an isolating coating 
[11]. Second,  despite  the  progress  in  the methods  for  elimination  of  the ohmic 
component [3] the results of the polarized potential measurements in the zones of 
direct  and  alternating  stray  currents  are  not  sufficiently  reliable.  Third,  it  is 
difficult to measure the polarized potential in high-resistance soils (rocky, dry, or 
permafrost) or on pipelines with a heat-insulating coating. 
It is practically useless to measure the potential of a pipeline segment to assess 
the  initiation  probability  and  growth  rate  of  local  corrosion  defects  under  a 
delaminated coating. 
Thus, to overcome CM problems, it is insufficient to measure the pipe polarized  
potential, and it is necessary to search for new methods for assessing the pipeline 
corrosion state and CP efficiency. 
1.3. Determination of the pipe outside corrosion rate using electrical 
resistance probes 
Electrical resistance probes (ER probes) are widely used to monitor corrosion rates 
in various technical areas. Their operating principle is based on the fact that the 
electric  resistance of  metallic  conductors increases  as  the  cross-sectional  area 
decreases due to corrosion. In the case of pipeline CM, a corrosion probe is placed 
in the soil adjacent to the pipe surface and is electrically connected to the pipeline 
[12-15]. 
1.4. Assessment  of  the  possibility  of  hydrogen  induced stress 
cracking of a steel pipeline  
 The possibility of the origination of such hazardous corrosion as hydrogen 
induced stress cracking  (HISC) of  pipe  steel  can  be  monitored  using  hydrogen 
probes. The  dissolution  of  atomic  hydrogen  in  steel  can  result  in  hydrogen 
9 
 
embrittlement and, hence, in the stress corrosion cracking (SCC) of steel. A crack 
grows when the hydrogen concentration in the metal exceeds a certain critical value. 
The  critical  concentration  values  are  reached  at  critical  rates  of  hydrogen 
permeation into steel [16-17]. The rates of hydrogen permeation into steel can be 
measured under field conditions using hydrogen probes [16]. 
In  this  paper, the  opportunity  to  assess  the  pipeline corrosion  state  and  CP 
efficiency using ER probes and hydrogen probes are discussed.   
2. Experimental procedure 
2.1. Design of electrical resistance probes 
The corrosion penetration depth (¨d) is calculated either from an increase in the 
working element (WE) resistance (for general corrosion) or from the time until WE 
rupture (for local corrosion). The general corrosion rate is determined as: 
¨d = d0(1 ² R0/R
)/
 ,                                            (5) 
where d0 is the initial thickness of WE; R0 is the initial WE resistance; and R
 is the 
WE resistance upon exposure time, 
.  
By simultaneously recording the WE and thermal sensor resistances, it is possible to 
bring the WE resistance to a standard temperature. Then, the observed changes in 
the readings from ER probe can be attributed to corrosion effects. 
The  surface  (S  MQG  POLŃNQHVV  RI  POH  (5  SURNH·V  J(  MUH  VHOHŃPHG  NMVHG  RQ  POH 
following conflicting requirements: 
- The d0 value should be large to ensure a long life of the probe. It has been 
determined experimentally that the following requirement should be met when the 
rate or uniform corrosion is determined: ¨d < 0.5 d0 [18]. 
- High  sensitivity  (or  improvement  of the probe  response  time)  requires 
10 
 
either a small d0 or high-precision measurements of WE resistance; however, the 
latter approach considerably increases the cost of the measuring instrument; 
- High reproducibility of ER probe readings requires a sufficiently large area 
of metal contact with the heterogeneous medium (soil). 
- The power  consumption  for  electrochemical  protection  with  a  probe 
connected to the pipe is minimised by decreasing S. However, at too low S values, 
the probe potential in the real pipeline CP circuits will be more negative than the 
metal potential in the coating holes [11] hence, S should not be smaller than the 
maximum area of a coating defect on the pipeline segment being monitored. 
- The probe design should allow it to be located as close as possible to the 
pipeline;  however,  installation  of  a  probe  directly  on  the  pipe  surface  generally 
makes mounting more expensive. 
Furthermore,  the  dimensions  and  configuration  of  the  working  element should 
allow assessment of the crevice growth rate based on the rupture time, 
rup. 
 All of the above requirements cannot be achieved in a single sensor. In view 
of this, a number of ER probe types have been developed by [12, 13, 19, 20], and the 
use of a specific probe in a CM system depends on the intended purpose. Below 
described results were obtained by using two types of ER probes (Table 1). 
Table 1. Dimensions and uses of WEs in corrosion ER probes. 
Probe type 
WE 
thickness, 
µm 
WE surface area, 
cm2 Probe application 
DK 100 30 - 330 
Monitoring the pipeline corrosion rate in 
insulating coating defects; assessment of 
cathodic protection performance 
VIK 0.1  - 0.2 4.5 
Express analysis of soil corrosivity; 
assessment of cathodic protection 
performance 
DK  probe is  a  cylindrical  corrosion  probe  equipped  with  a  built-in  resistance 
thermometer. The working element of DK probe is a 100 µm thick steel foil band, 
11 
 
3 mm wide, arranged on a plastic tube in the form of a one-layer winding with a 
1.5  mm  step. The  length  of WE  can  be  varied  from  1  to  11  m.  The  chemical 
composition (wt %) of WE steel is as follows: C: 0.05, Mn: 0.38, Si: 0.03, Cr: 0.05, Cu: 
0.15, S: 0.04, P: 0.035, Al: 0.16, Ni: 0.09.  
The working element of the VIK probe consists of a 0.1 - 0.2 µm iron layer thick 
vapour-deposited on a dielectric support by decomposition of iron pentacarbonyl. 
It is used for the express assessment (within 1 to 2 days) of soil corrosivity and for 
monitoring  the  parameters  of the electrochemical  protection  of  pipelines. VIK 
probe is  characterised  by  high  sensitivity  and  fast  response  (approximately 30 
min), but its lifetime is as short as several days. The reliability of corrosion rates 
obtained  using  the  VIK  was  confirmed  by  the  gravimetric  method  using  steel 
specimens [19]. 
2.2. Design and operating principle of the hydrogen probe 
The DH-1 hydrogen probe was developed by [21].The probe operation is based on 
the  use  of  the  Devanathan-6PMŃOXUVNL·V  ŃHOO.   $  SURNH·V  100  P  POLŃN  VPHHO 
membrane is electrically connected to a pipe, and its outside surface has the same 
potential as the pipe. Hydrogen formed on the outer membrane surface partially 
enters  into  the  metal  and  diffuses  to  the  internal  membrane  surface.  On  the 
internal membrane surface, a potential is maintained at which atomic hydrogen is 
oxidised. Under steady-state conditions, hydrogen concentration in the metal (CH) 
can be calculated from the current of the hydrogen penetration through the steel 
membrane, ip (Equation 6):  
CH = ip L M/F 
 D, (6) 
where L is the membrane thickness, M is the atomic mass of hydrogen, F is the 
Faraday  constant, 
 is  the  specific  density  of  the  steel,  and D is  the  hydrogen 
diffusion coefficient in the steel. Thus, ip can be considered as a criterion of the 
steel hydrogen embrittlement hazard. 
12 
 
2.3. Design of the CM point 
Typical  CM  point was  equipped with  several ER-probes  or  hydrogen  probes, 
reference electrode (CSE), data logger with satellite transmitter for collecting and 
transmitting  of  data  (Fig. 1). All  probes  have  electric  contact  with the pipeline 
except ER-probes which were used for determination of corrosion activity of soil. 
The probes were installed into ground close (not far 5 cm) to pipe surface. 
 
Fig. 1:  Design of typical CM point. 
2.4. Data collection 
IR probes were monitored at least 2 times per day for the first month. Thereafter, 
the monitoring frequency was decreased, but it was not less than one reading per 
month. Hydrogen  probes were  monitored  at  least  4 times per day for  the  test 

13 
 
period.   
3. Results and discussion 
3.1. Use  of  ER  probes  for  the measurement  of  the  "residual" 
corrosion rate in the case of CP operation 
Figure 2 shows  the  thickness  variation (
d)  of  working  elements  in  DK probe 
(Figure 2a) and VIK probes (Figure 2b) versus time. The probes were connected to 
an  operating  gas  pipeline  at  the  drainage  point  of  the  cathodic  station.  The 
pipeline polarized potential was -1.15 V (CSE). An approximately constant 
d in 
the VIK probes is established within 15 hours and that in DK probes, within 2-5 
days.  The  subsequent  variations  of 
d during  the  entire  test  (22  days)  are 
insignificant.  The  measured  steel  corrosion  rate  under  these  conditions  is 
negligibly small (below 10 
m/year), which proves the efficiency of the pipeline 
cathodic  protection.  The  surface  area  of  the  working  element  in  DK  is 
approximately 20 times larger than that in VIK. This is why it takes much longer 
for a protective potential to be established on DK probes in comparison with VIK 
probes. 
   
Fig. 2: Variation of WE thickness of two DK probes (a) and a VIK probe (b) at the 
pipeline cathodic protection potential. 


14 
 
3.2. Corrosion  rate  measurement  in  a  coating  defect  with 
disconnected CP 
A DK probe was installed on a segment of a working gas pipeline. The CP was 
temporarily disconnected. Figure 3 shows the variation in time of the thickness of 
the  probe  working  layer.  The  initial  test  period  (~1  hour)  was  not  taken  into 
account  in the corrosion  rate  calculations.  The  corrosion  rate  measured  by  the 
probe was approximately 0.5 mm/year, which classifies this gas pipeline section as 
a high corrosion hazard. 
  
Fig. 3: WE thickness variation in a DK probe with disconnected CP. 
The accuracy and reliability of corrosion rate measurements increase as either the 
probe exposure time or the measurement frequency increase. Figure 4 shows the 

d vs. time plot obtained on a DK probe that was connected to an operating oil 
pipeline  not  equipped  with  a F3  V\VPHPB  7OH  UHVLVPMQŃH  RI  POH  SURNH·V  J(  RMV 
measured  every  hour. Although  the  measured 
d values  are  scattered,  the 
variation of these values in time can be fitted by a linear equation with a high 
correlation  factor; and the  calculated  corrosion  rate  equals  0.2  mm/year. This 

15 
 
corrosion rate remained almost unchanged for 40 days at this pipeline section. 
  
Fig. 4: Time variation of the WE thickness in a DK probe at a field oil pipeline 
segment without CP. 
3.3. Soil corrosivity measurement 
Probes can be used to assess the soil corrosivity expressed in corrosion rate units. 
Express assessments can be performed by means of VIK probes, using a resistance 
meter with a measurement accuracy of 0.1 Ohm as the measuring tool. 
Figure 5 presents the variation of WE thickness vs. time in three VIK probes at the 
free corrosion potential. The corrosion rate calculations were performed without 
ŃRQVLGHUMPLRQ IRU POH LQLPLMO PHVP SHULRG a20 PLQ GXULQJ ROLŃO POH SURNH·V J( 
acquires a constant temperature and potential. Figure 4 shows that after 20 hours 
of testing, the 
d significantly exceeds  0.5d0, whereas the 
d - 
 plot  strongly 
deviates  from  linearity.  This  confirms  the  limited  lifetime  of  the  probe, during 
which  its  corrosion  rate  can  be  considered  constant.  The  mean  corrosion  rate 
calculated over a period of up to 20 hours equals 45 µm/year. 
 

16 
 
  
Fig. 5: Variation of the WE thickness in VIK probes not connected to a pipeline. 
Thus,  within  certain  limitations,  VIK  probes  can  be  used  to  assess  the  free 
corrosion  rate  of  steel  in  a  specific  soil (i.e., its  corrosivity),  the  assessment 
duration being one day. If longer-term problems are to be solved, for example, to 
assess  the  effect  of  seasonal  factors  (variation  of  soil  electrical  resistance, 
temperature,  humidity,  and  chemical  composition)  on  the  corrosion  kinetics  of 
underground structures, it is recommended to use DK probes that provide more 
adequate integral estimates of the steel corrosion rate. 
3.4. Assessment of local corrosion rates 
The  corrosion  rate  calculated  from the electrical  resistance  variation  is  an 
averaged quantity. For example, Figure 6 provides the thickness profiles of certain 
sections  of  a  working  element  (steel  band  with d0 =  100 µm)  in  a  DK  probe 
installed at a distance of 1 km from an operating CP device. Based on the results 
of  a  one-year  exposure,  the  mean  corrosion  rate  was  0.017  mm/year). The 
corrosion of the probe's working element is distributed rather uniformly, though 
in certain places, 
d is up to 50 µm, and the local corrosion rate is approximately 
three times higher than the mean value. 

17 
 
The  ratio  of the penetration  depths  of the crevice  corrosion  (¨dL)  and the 
tentatively  uniform  corrosion  (¨d)  depends  on  many  factors,  including  the 
composition  of  the  corrosive  medium.  Repeated  attempts  have  been  made  to 
assess this ratio for the corrosion of carbon steels in soils; this was also reflected 
in certain standards [22].  As noted above, the rate of crevice corrosion can be 
MVVHVVHG IURP POH SURNH·V J( UXSPXUH PLPH (Equation 5) 
¨dL = d0/
rup                                             (5) 
Although 
rup GHSHQGV RQ POH SURNH J(·V POLŃNQHVV MQG RLGPOB +RRHYHU ŃRPSMULVRQ 
of  the ¨dL values  determined  using  probes  of  the  same  type  provides  certain 
information  on  the  degree  of  non-uniformity  of the external  corrosion  on the 
pipeline segment being monitored. 
  
Fig. 6: 7OLŃNQHVV SURILOH RI M G. SURNH·V J( MIPHU 12 PRQPOV RI H[SRVXUH MP POH 
gas pipeline CP potential. 
For example, Table 2 lists average values of ¨d, ¨dL, and their ratios measured 
using  DK  probes  on  operating  field  oil  pipelines  without  CP.  The  pipe  walls  of 
these pipelines had been repeatedly ruptured; as result, the adjacent soil has been 

18 
 
salted  with  water  and  has  acquired  a  high  corrosivity.  Corrosion macropairs 
formed  in  locations  where  the  pipeline  crossed  the  boundaries  of  natural  and 
salted soils, which explains the high corrosion rates of the probe WEs. As follows 
from Table 2, the local corrosion rates are up to 2.7 mm/year, whereas the ¨dL/¨d 
ratio  varies  from  9.7  to  1.9;  the  mean ¨dL/¨d value  at the monitored  pipeline 
sections amounts to 3.6. The corrosion rates at the pipeline sections located in 
soils with lower corrosivity are several times smaller, but the mean ¨dL/¨d ratio is 
also approximately 3. However, upon longer exposure of the probes, the measured 
corrosion rates should decrease, and the ¨dL/¨d ratio should increase. 
Table 2. Uniform corrosion and crevice corrosion rates and their ratios (¨dL/¨d) 
measured at pipelines in the absence of CP. 
Inspection 
station number 
Uniform corrosion 
rate, mm/year 
Crevice corrosion 
rate, mm/year ¨dL/¨d  
1 0.325 1.30 4.0 
2 0.316 1.33 4.2 
3 1.00 2.68 2.7 
4 0.312 0.63 2.0 
5 0.112 1.09 9.7 
6 0.208 0.39 1.9 
7 0.660 1.40 2.1 
8 0.275 0.74 2.7 
9 0.445 1.25 2.8 
 
Thus, corrosion probes can be used efficiently to achieve the following goals in 
monitoring the external corrosion of underground pipelines: 
- PHMVXUHPHQP  RI  UHVLGXMOµ  ŃRUURVLRQ  UMPHV  MP  POH  SURPHŃPLYH  SRPHQPLMO  LBHB 
determining the performance of CP; 
- corrosion rate measurements in a coating defect and ranking of pipeline sections 
by corrosion hazard, taking into account the effect of stray currents and currents 
of extensive macropairs; 
- measurement of soil corrosivity with respect to uniform and crevice corrosion. 
19 
 
3.5. Assessment of the possibility of HISC of a steel pipeline in the 
operating zone of cathodic stations 
The  measurement  of  the  hydrogen permeation rate  on  operating  pipelines  was 
part  of a program  of  RAO  Gazprom  in  1995-1997  aimed  at investigating the 
causes of  corrosion  failures  previously  observed  on  the  pipelines  of the 
Krasnoturyinsk district, Sverdlovsk region, Russia [23]. To this end, control sites 
were  arranged  at  CP  drainage  points, with  four  to  six  DH-1  hydrogen  probes 
installed on each. Figure 7 shows the results of the ip measurements at one of the 
sites taken over 1.5 years. One can see that the maximum flux density of hydrogen 
into the steel did not exceed 12 - 13 µA/cm2, mainly in the summer months. The 
gas pipeline potentials measured without correction for the ohmic drop ranged 
from -2.5 to -3.5 V (CSE). 
  
Fig. 7: Plot of the current densities measured by hydrogen probes at control 
site; 1 - 4 - parallel gas pipelines. 
The critical ip values, at which crack growth by the steel hydrogen embrittlement 
mechanism is triggered, were determined by laboratory experiments on specimens 
with  pre-formed  cracks.  The  ambiguous  effect  of  cathodic  polarisation  on  the 

20 
 
crack  growth  rate was  used  for  this  purpose [24].  Cathodic  polarisation  would 
slow  down  the  growth  of  corrosion  cracks  by  the  mechanism of local  anodic 
dissolution  of  metal and  accelerate  the  growth  by  the hydrogen  induced  stress 
corrosion mechanism HISC. 
In laboratory tests, HISC becomes the major crack growth mechanism in ɏ70 pipe 
steel at current densities of hydrogen penetration through membrane above 100 
µA/cm2 (at L = 100 µm) [17]. The hydrogen probes did not give such readings at 
any pipelines in the Krasnoturinsk district. It was thus concluded that cathodic 
protection does not stimulate the SCC of underground pipelines. 
This conclusion is only correct for steels of this strength grade and for the types 
of  soils  studied.  It  is  possible  that  in  soils  containing hydrogen  absorption 
promoters,  e.g.,  hydrogen sulphide,  hydrogen  can  be  accumulated  in  higher 
concentrations. 
The use of X80 and X100 steels, as well as consideration for cyclic mechanical 
stress, may result in adjustments of the critical rates of hydrogen absorption by 
steel  at  which  metal  hydrogen  embrittlement  occurs.  Furthermore,  some 
researchers believe that the SCC of pipe steels in environments with near-neutral 
pH results from a synergistic effect of hydrogen and stress on local metal anodic 
dissolution [25-27]. It  follows  that  cathodic  protection can prevent  the 
development of stress corrosion, but at potentials near the corrosion potential, an 
increase  in  the  concentration  of absorbed hydrogen  can  accelerate  the  crack 
growth. 
3.6. Promising methods of indirect local corrosion diagnostics under 
delaminated pipeline coatings 
Monitoring the state of the external pipe surface under a delaminated coating is 
the most difficult problem faced in the corrosion monitoring of pipelines. The use 
of ER  probes was  suggested for  the  monitoring  of  under-film  corrosion [18]. 
21 
 
However, the experience in application of under-film corrosion probes is rather 
scarce because the probes have to be installed directly onto a pipe surface, making 
it difficult to reproduce the conditions of under-film corrosion growth. 
It is more promising to develop CM methods that allow for the prediction of the 
origination  and  growth  of  local  corrosion  defects  by analysing the  chemical 
composition  of  the  soil  electrolytes and/or  by  measuring  the  partial  corrosion 
reaction rates on a probe placed into the soil near a pipe wall or into the under-
film  electrolyte.  The  development  of  such  CM  methods  requires  a  deeper 
understanding  of  the  local  corrosion  initiation centre and  growth  mechanism. 
Because stress  corrosion  cracking  of  pipe  steel in  soils  with  near-neutral  pH  is 
currently  the  most  hazardous  type  of  under-film  corrosion,  researchers have 
mainly focused on studies of this phenomenon [28-30].  
In  particular,  the  presence  of  CO2 and  H2S  in  the  corrosive  medium  accelerates 
crack  growth [28-32] and  shortens  the  time  until  crack  appearance [33]. In 
addition, crack colonies on pipe walls are found in anaerobic soils that have pH 
values  of  5.5-7.5. Therefore, it  is  considered  necessary  to  monitor  the  soil 
electrolyte pH and oxygen, hydrogen sulphide and carbon dioxide levels. 
Because carbonic  acid  and  hydrogen sulphide molecules  dissociate  to  give  the 
respective ions, it was suggested that the composition of the soil electrolytes be 
determined in the field using ion-selective electrodes. 
Soils at pipeline segments where crack colonies formed were found to have higher 
concentrations of sulphide-containing compounds (HS- and S2- ions) (Figure 8). 
22 
 
  
Fig. 8: Changes in the concentration of sulphide-containing compounds in a soil 
electrolyte  at  a  pipeline  segment. Arrows denote  the  locations  of  the  crack 
colonies found upon control excavations. 
The oxygen concentration in a soil electrolyte can be determined from the rate of 
its  cathodic  reduction  on  a  special  test  electrode  made  of  pipe  steel.  It  is  also 
considered reasonable to determine the hydrogen absorption rate and the kinetics 
of  pipe  steel  anodic  dissolution  in  the  soil  electrolyte  at  a  pipeline  being 
monitored. The anodic current values at a preset potential and the character of the 
current  variation versus time  can  be  indications  of  local  steel  dissolution,  and 
therefore  show  the  possibility  of  the  formation  of  a  mechanical  stress 
concentrator on the pipe surface. 
Measurements made using special probes, which include ion-selective electrodes 
and electrodes made of pipe steel, should improve the reliability of the existing 
method  for the discovery  of  pipeline  segments  potentially  prone  to  stress 
corrosion. Further  research on the  impact  of  the  composition  of the soil 
electrolytes on pipe steel SCC should lead to the establishment of new criteria for 
determining the possibility of crack initiation and assessment of the growth rate 

23 
 
of cracks in pipe steel under delaminated coatings. 
4. ɋonclusions 
Currently, the  most  urgent  goals  of  underground  pipeline  external  corrosion 
monitoring  include:  1)  assessment  of the CP  efficiency  by  determining  the 
UHVLGXMOµ ŃRUURVLRQ UMPH 2 UMQNLQJ SLSHOLQH VHJPHQPV N\ POH PHPMO ŃRUURVLRQ UMPH 
in  a  through  coating  defect  in  the  absence  of  CP, and 3)  predicting  the 
development of hazardous corrosion defects (cracks and crevices), primarily under 
a delaminated coating. The first two CM goals can be achieved using various ER 
probes. 
GHPHUPLQMPLRQ  RI  POH  UHVLGXMOµ  ŃRUURVLRQ  UMPH  ŃRPSOHPHQPV  POH  H[LVPLQJ  F3 
efficiency monitoring that is based on polarized potential measurements. Hence, 
corrosion sensors should be installed in areas with unstable temporal variation of 
the  potential  (zones  of  stray  or  induced  currents)  or  where  measurements  of 
potential  are  complicated  (high-resistance  soils,  heat-insulated  pipelines).  The 
main problem that remains unresolved involves the measurement of the efficiency 
criterion of the pipeline protection, i.e., the UHVLGXMOµ XQLIRUP ŃRUURVLRQ UMPHB $P 
the moment, we can agree with the authors of [18] that a rate of uniform corrosion 
below 25 µm/year measured over a period of one year is an indicator of efficient 
CP, but it is impossible to make a final decision on the magnitude of this criterion 
without the large-scale use of corrosion sensors. 
Ranking pipeline sections based on the use of corrosion sensors provides grounds 
for  decreasing  (in  absolute  magnitude)  the  CP  protective  potential  at  pipeline 
sections  with  low  corrosion  susceptibility,  or  otherwise  strengthening  the 
corrosion  protection  (by  CP  installation,  changing  the  operating  modes  of the 
cathodic stations, pipeline re-insulation) at pipeline sections with high corrosion 
susceptibility. 
Prediction of the origination of hazardous corrosion defects under delaminated 
24 
 
pipeline coatings remains the most difficult problem of CM. However, the progress 
made in understanding the stress corrosion mechanism in pH-neutral soils and the 
development of express methods for determining the chemical composition of soil 
electrolytes and electrode reaction rates leading to the growth of cracks, allows 
one  to  expect  a  substantial  improvement  in  the  reliability  of  the  methods  for 
diagnostics of potentially hazardous pipeline segments. 
References 
[1] Cole,  I.S.,  &  Marney,  D.  The  science  of  pipe  corrosion:  A  review  of  the 
literature on the corrosion of ferrous metals in soils. Journal of Corrosion 
Science, 56 (2012) 5-16. 
[2] Peabody A.W.  Control  of  Pipeline  Corrosion,  2nd  ed.,  ed.  R.  Bianchetti. 
Houston, TX: NACE International (2001).  
[3] NACE Standard SP0169-2007 Control of External Corrosion on Underground 
or Submerged Metallic Piping Systems. 
[4] ANSI/NACE  SP0502-2008.  Pipeline  External  Corrosion  Direct  Assessment 
Methodology. Houston, TX: NACE (2008). 
[5] Baeckmann,  W.  &  Schwenk,  W.  Handbuch  des  kathodischen 
Korrosionsschutzes. (2th ed). Basel: Verlag Chemie, (Chapter 2) (1980). 
[6] Florianovich, G.M. Mechanism of active dissolution of metals of iron group. 
Advances in science and technology. Ser. Corrosion and corrosion protection, 
(in Russian) 6 (1978) 136-164. 
[7] Zartsin,  I.D.,  &  Marshakov,  A.I.  Thermodynamic  conjugation  of  the  partial 
processes  of  metal  corrosion  in  the  presence  of  oxidizers.    Protection  of 
Metals, 32 (1996) 388-393. 
[8] Marshakov,  A.I.,  & Mikhailovsky,  Yu.N.  Effect  of  oxygen  and  oxygen-
containing oxidizers on the rate of the active dissolution of metals in acid 
media. Russian Journal of Electrochemistry, 30 (1994) 476-480. 
[9] Marshakov, A. I., & Ignatenko, V. E. Effect of nitrite anions on the rate of iron 
dissolution  in  acid  electrolytes. Journal  of  Applied  Electrochemistry, 29 
25 
 
(1999) 201-207. 
[10] GOST  R  51164-98  (Russian  State  Standart).  Steel  trunk  pipelines. 
General requirements from corrosion protection (in Russian). 
[11] Freiman,  L.I.  A  Simple  Substantiation  of  Monitoring  the  Cathodic 
Protection  of  Underground  Pipelines  by  Potential  Sensors.  Protection  of 
metals, 37 (6) (2001) 605-607. 
[12] Mikhailovsky,  Yu.N.,  Marshakov,  A.I.,  &  Petrov,  N.A.  Monitoring  of 
underground  pipeline corrosion  condition  with  sensory  instruments. 
Protection of Metals, 33 (3) (1997) 293-295. 
[13] Mikhailovsky,  Yu.N.,  Marshakov,  A.I.,  Ignatenko,  V.E.,  & Petrov,  N.A. 
Estimation of the probability of hydrogen embrittlement of steel pipelines in 
the operation zones of cathodic stations. Protection of Metals, 36 (2) (2000) 
118-123. 
[14] Khan,  N.A.  Use  of  ER  Soil  Corrosion  Probe  to  Determine  the 
Effectiveness  of  Cathodic  Protection.    Corrosion/02.  Houston,  TX:  NACE, 
(2002) paper no. 104. 
[15] NACE  Publication  1C184.  Hydrogen  permeation  measurement  and 
monitoring technology. Houston, TX: NACE (2008). 
[16] Nielsen,  L.V.  Hydrogen-related  stress  corrosion  cracking  in  line  pipe 
sPHHOB  HQ  3URŃHHGLQJV  (852F255·E7  OHOG  22-25  September.  Trondheim, 
Norway, 1 (1997) 141. 
[17] Ignatenko,  V.E.,  Marshakov,  A.I.,  Marichev,  V.A.  et  al.  a. Effect  of 
cathodic polarization on the corrosion cracking rate in pipe steels. Protection 
of Metals, 36 (2) (2000) 111-117. 
[18] NACE Publication 05107. Corrosion Probe in Soil or Concrete. Houston, 
TX: NACE (2007). 
[19] Ignatenko,  V.E.,  Marshakov,  A.I.,  Rybkina,  A.A.  et  al.  Highly  sensitive 
indicator  for  monitoring  the  corrosion  state  of  underground  pipe-lines. 
Corrosion: materials and protection, (in Russian) 5 (2005) 12-17  
[20] Marshakov, A.I., Petrov, N.A., Nenasheva, T.A. et al. Monitoring of the 
26 
 
external corrosion of underground steel pipelines. Corrosion: materials and 
protection, (in Russian) 4 (2011) 13-23.  
[21] Mikhailovsky,  Yu.N.,  Marshakov,  A.I.,  Popova,  V.M.  et  al.  Hydrogen 
penetration  sensor  for  steel  constructions  in  a  variety  of  corrosion 
environments. Zashchita metallov, (in Russian) 29 (4) (1993) 647-649.  
[22] Standard  DIN  50  929.  Corrosion  of  metals. Underground  and 
underwater  pipelines  and  structural  components,  Berlin,  German:  Institute 
for Standardization. (Part 3) (1985). 
[23] Mikhailovsky, Yu.N., Marshakov, A.I., & Ignatenko, V.E. b. Monitoring of 
the  corrosion  state  of  underground  pipelines  with  corroding  resistors-
transducers. Protection of Metals, 36 (2) (2000) 583-587. 
[24] Marichev,  V.A. Ambiguous  effect  of  cathodic  polarization  on  crack 
growth  as  the  general  regularity  of  stress-corrosion  cracking  of  structural 
materials. Werkstoffe und Korrosion, 40 (1989) 304-308. 
[25] Been, J., King, F., & Sutherby, R. Environmentally assisted cracking of 
pipeline  steels  in  near-neutral  pH  environments.  Environment-induced 
cracking of materials. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2 (2004) 221. 
[26] Li, M.C., & Cheng, Y.F. Mechanistic investigation of hydrogen-enhanced 
anodic dissolution of X-70 pipe steel and its implication on near-neutral pH 
SCC of pipelines. Electrochimica Acta, 52 (28) (2007) 811-8117. 
[27] Liu, Z.Y., Li, X.G., & Cheng, Y.F. Mechanictic aspect of near-neutral pH 
stress corrosion cracking of pipelines under cathodic polarization. Corrosion 
Science, 55 (1) (2012) 54-60. 
[28] Baker,  M.  Integrity  Management  Program.  Stress  corrosion  cracking 
study. Department of Transportation. Office of Pipeline Safety, final report, 
OPS TTO8. Basel: Verlag Chemie, (2005) p. 63. 
[29] Eadie,  R.L.  Near-Neutral  pH  Stress  Corrosion  Cracking  in  Steel 
Pipelines. 16-th International Corrosion Congress. September 19-24. Beijing. 
China. (2005) paper no. 04-Keynote. 
[30] Malkin, A.I., Marshakov, A.I., Ignatenko, V.E., & Arabei, A.B. Processes of 
27 
 
nucleation  and  growth  of  corrosion  cracks  on  main  pipeline  steel.  Part  2 
Kinetic  regularities  and  effect  of  exploitation  conditions  on  SCC  of  pipe 
steels  in  aqua  media.    Corrosion:  materials  and  protection, (in  Russian) 2 
(2010) 1-13. 
[31] Yang, W., Li G., Guo, H., Huang, C., & Zhou, J. Stress corrosion cracking 
of pipeline steels. 16-th Int. Corros. Congress; Beijing. China. (2005) paper 
no. 10-SCC-13. 
[32] Eadie, R.L., Szklarz, K.E., & Sutherby, R.L. Corrosion fatigue and near-
neutral  pH  stress  corrosion  crackinf  of  pipeline  steel  and  the  effect  of 
hydrogen sulfide. Corrosion, (2005) 61 (2) 167-173. 
[33] Petrunin,  M.A.,  Maksaeva,  L.B.,  Yurasova,  T.A.,  & Marshakov,  A.I. 
Initiation  of  stress  corrosion  cracking  on  pipe  steels.  Effect  of  corrosion-
active media composition. 207 Meeting of the Electrochem Soc., May 15-20, 
Quebec, Canada. (2005) paper no 241. 